Before actually writing some Codes,
and creating an app,
we need to discuss a little
bit about Android versioning.
So today Android goes from version one,
the first one, to version 13.
Of course, we might have the latest
version still in Beta or
when developer preview.
But that's roughly how it works.
And today at least we tend
to have one major number
per year of the operating system.
We used to have code names.
Probably you have heard about this, like
Froyo, Gingerbread Ice Cream Sandwich,
like every Android version
used to have the surname.
Then names were deprecated from
version ten to kind of 12,
but they're still there.
And even today,
it seems like they're coming back.
So these names, but
this is just a codename, and
it's actually not so important for us.
Actually, the version number,
the one that says 12.1,
It's also not important to us developers,
okay?
We will care about something known as the
API number, also known as the SDK number.
That's what we care about.
This is actually an integer,
a consecutive integer
that express the current
version of the API.
Every time there is a new Android
version change in the API.
So they have more things, less things.
They have renamed some methods or
classes, they have a new number.
Sometimes there really a new Android
version, but they don't change the API.
So for now, for
us it's just the same in that case.
It's just I'm building for API 32,
I don't care if it's 12 or
12.1 or 12.1.3, it's just the same, okay?
So we are going to care
about the API number.
Just remember that we are going
to see the API number a couple
of times during app development.
So we won't see the code name.
We won't see,
let's say the end-user version number.
We will talk about the API number.
And to make things more complicated for
us,
every app contains three different
API definitions or API declarations.
We have the minimum SDK version
that defines installability.
That means when we are building
an APK an android application,
we will pick the minimum API number
that we're going to support.
So I can say my app is
compatible from API 15.
So in that case, you're making yourself
responsible of using APIs only available
in version 15 or if you're using an API
that is only available on later versions,
you have a conditional that won't
execute those APIs on all other devices.
Because if not, the app will crash.
And if you try to use an API that is
not on the phone, the app will crash.
We don't want that, okay?
By the way,
if your app crashes it will reduce some
kind of score within the Play Store.
If your app is published
in the Play Store, okay?
So it's important to reduce
the amount of crashes and
bugs because that improves some kind of,
it's like SEO, search engine optimization.
So it improves your
ranking in the Playstore.
So we don't want crashes.
Crashes happen, but
we need to monitor crashes and solve them.
So that's the first definition
that we need to make, okay?
The minimum SDK version.
Then we have the target SDK version, that
at first, it's a little weird to follow.
But let me tell you this.
It's actually the version
of the of the API or
the SDK that you tested your app on.
So you're making sure that I mean,
right now let's say that we
are building with API 30.
That means that we we
are testing our app in API 30.
And we are telling the OS that
with API 30, my app works okay.
Because what happens in the future,
when we have API 40.
Well I don't know what will
happen today in the future.
So I wanna let the OS know that
this was working fine on 30.
And if it chases behavior.
For example,
let's say that foldable phones were
not part of the Android SDK until API 30,
okay?
So if we compile the app with a target 28,
that means we didn't know
about foldables at the time.
So we are not foldable compatible.
So even if you run your app on a foldable
device, the phone will know that your app
is not compatible with
the idea of a foldable, okay?
With that in mind,
the OS will change behavior.
For example, it won't offer
the app the ability to split
the screen in two halves or
something like that, okay?
If you are defining your target from
a minimum SDK that supports foldables,
the OS will expect you to
know how to live with that.
Think about the future.
Let's say that in Android, in the SDK 40,
they will support holograms, okay?
But we are building the app today.
We don't know about holograms or
how to render holographics UIs.
Well, because we are building on
set setting the target SDK as 32.
The holographic OS will know that
we are not holographic compatible,
so they will render or
app in some kind of 2D emulator, okay?
Something like that.
So that makes sense?
And finally we have the compiler.
So this is actually not
shipping with the app,
that definition is just
a compiler we are using.
The more modern compiler
typically the more efficient and
the better output that we have.
And typically,
we use the latest available.
Unless there is a bug or
something special that we need to where
we need to use an older compiler.
We're going to use the latest available.
Okay, so these are decisions that we need
to make every time we make an app, okay?
And we will see in a minute where
we're going to make those definitions.
Okay, typically,
this is a relationship between these SDK.
So the compiler is the latest one,
the target SDK most of the time,
you use the same one as the compiler.
So most of the time, they are the same and
the minimum SDK it typically
goes back to the past.
And I will tell you why in a minute, okay?
In fact, before moving on with somewhere,
I have a couple of more slides and
then we will jump directly into lingo.
I'm going to open Andrea Stewart.
You don't need to follow me at this point.
I'm going to create a new project,
just to show you something really quick.
When you create a new project,
it doesn't matter what I'm picking here.
It's not the important part.
I wanna show you this.
When we are building the app,
when we are creating the project,
I can pick here the minimum best SDK,
okay?
So it's actually suggesting
me to start with API 21.
API 21 is Android 5.0.
And why picking the minimum
SDK is important?
Maybe you're saying, hey,
why are you going to start with API one?
I wanna be compatible with everyone.
The problem is that
the further you go back,
the less APIs you have available, okay?
And here we have a link
that says help me choose.
If you click there,
you have this nice diagram that will
tell you based on
the current active users,
how many users are going to be covering,
if you set that as a minimum.
So if I set API 21 as my minimum,
it's 98% of the android users out there.
That means there are still
2% with android 4, okay?
That's eight years ago.
So there are still ADRO OLED
devices out there in the market.
But if you peek 28, okay?
You are losing 30% or
more than 30% of your user.
So they won't be able to install your app
If you set that as your minimum, okay?
So this is a decision
that you need to make.
Of course, there are more
versions that you are covering.
That means more testing, as well,
more UI testing, because you need to
make sure that all the users in all those
versions are using your app properly.
And the app is working
properly on their devices.
Do you have any question at this point?
Yeah.
>> So are you making a prediction that
holograms will holographic UI will be
available in 40?
>> I don't know maybe yeah,
maybe or maybe AR mean,
you put your glasses and the app will
pop up in 3D, in the environment.
I mean, that can happen every time.
I mean in the next few years, but yeah.
The thing is that when we
are working with the app,
we need to understand that
our app will be compatible.
So Android tries to be
always future proof.
And with that in mind, if you're building
your app today, and you're selecting
the target with today's maximum target,
future Android devices will know that and
they will do their best to actually make
your app work great even in future Hower.
So, that's kind of the idea, right?
That we are going to,
I mean there is no guarantee.
But it's kind of they're trying to
push this idea of future proof.
That if, I mean in the Play Store,
there are still a lot of apps out in the
Play Store that were built ten years ago.
And you're still downloading the same APK.
And the idea is that even if you
run this in a high resolution,
foldable device, the app should work fine.
And Android will try to match
whatever expectation you had as
a developer two years ago.
That kind of idea, okay?
Makes sense?
Okay, so just have in mind that those
are decisions that we need to make, okay?
So in terms of API is available,
as we mentioned before,
every new version of the Android
operating system includes new API.
API to Bluetooth to use wherever
new technology is available,
it may have to do with
something software based,
like a new background surveys in the OS or
hardware based.
The latest big sample is foldable devices,
okay?
The ability to support more than one
screen or a screen that can fold itself
and detect the events while that's one
of the latest big additions on Android.
If we target users on that new version,
it will take years to get
to the majority of users.
So if I'm building my
app using target API 32,
the latest one is to
the a 0% of the users.
0.5 probably..
And it will take years to
actually get 50%, okay?
So, because this is a problem, because
I wanna use the latest technologies,.
But also I need to support
all my user folder, okay?
So Google create the I mean,
the Android team created something
known as Support Libraries.
So Support Library is a framework, okay?
So that we need to import an ad
in our code that will let
us use latest abilities with
some kind of emulation or
polyfill on older devices, okay?
Because if not,
I'm always stuck with all APIs, okay?
Does it make sense?
So it's like on the web when you're using
polyfills to fill a gap in a browser
that is not supporting an API or
something like that.
Well, the Support Libraries today
were were renamed under the name
under the JetPack name.
So JetPack is actually a set
of libraries that are adding
Support Libraries and many other things.
So when we hear about Jetpack, it's just
these set of libraries is a backpack.
In fact, the logo of Jetpack is
an Android little guy with a backpack.
So it's the set of tools that we
actually need to create an app.
And in terms of color architecture,
the official SDK, the one that
we are using is based on a Java built
on machine and is pure written in Java.
So I know,
let's say the official SDK means the baton
the geolocation service,
the service that goes to the network.
Every API that we're using from
the OS is written in Java and
runs in your Java built
on machine Java VM, okay?
But it's not the Oracle or
the Sun built on machine.
It's own engines,
in fact they went to a legal fight,
Oracle and Google because of this, okay?
And so we write Java,
we compile Java but then,
it's not actually going to
Java intermediate language.
And there is no Java virtual machine
on the Android phone as we know
it it's a different machine.
And it's called Dalvik an ART,
that we have to run times their visual,
the original word called Dalvik.
It doesn't matter.
And the other one is Android Runtime.
Again, it doesn't matter about the names
but in case you heard about those names,
these are the runtimes that
are executing Dalvik code.
What's Dalvik code?
So let's say if you write Java and
now we will talk about Kotlin as well.
If you're writing Java, we compile
Java into Java, intermediate language.
And that intermediate language is
compiling to Dalvik executable code.
And that's like an Android format.
And then there are the BM will
run that Dalvik executable code.
So we don't compile native code on
Android, unless we are using C, okay?
And that's known as the NDK.
The Native Development kit,
but we are using the SDK.
And with the SDK,
we don't use C we use Java or Kotlin.
In that case, we don't write native code,
we actually write Dalbec executable code.
This is transparent to us developers.
But I want you to know how that works.
Because someone who had a problem
he will talk about the dex file and
you'll know what the dex file is.
Dex is Dalvik executable.
So we compiled to Java bytecode that
has garbage collector like Java.
And here comes Kotlin,
Kotlin also compiles to Java bytecode.
So we are going to write Kotlin.
And the Kotlin code that we're going to
write is going to be compiled into Java
into Dalvik executable code.
That is the same as if
we're building Java.
In fact probably that you
can on executables you can
actually decompile executables, okay?
We need to see if it's legal in your
country and in some situations but
you can decompile code.
When you decompile Kotlin applications,
you originally
get Java because it's the same
intermediate language.
It's like.net with T sharp
visual basic that they were
both compiling to net
intermediate language.
Well, this is the same.
We have Java on Android,
we have Kotlin and
Android both are combined into
the same built on machine code.
So they are 100% interoperable
because it's just the same.